Guru Yoga of the Guru Mahāmuni
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo śākyamunaye!
Those who wish to practise a means of accomplishing the Great Sage, indivisible from the guru,
should begin by taking refuge and generating bodhichitta as well as by meditating repeatedly
on the four immeasurables. Then:
ma dak nöchü mimik tongpar jang
The impure environment and inhabitants are purified into non-referential emptiness.
tongpé ngang lé shyingkham pünsum tsok
Out of the state of emptiness appears a perfect realm,
yang shing gyaché köpa püntsok ü
Vast, expansive and magnificently arranged.
hung lé rinchen lé drub shyalmé khang
In its centre, from a syllable Hūṃ arises a jewelled palace,
dé ü sengtri pema dawé teng
In the middle of which, upon a lion throne, lotus and moon,
mu yik ser gyi dokchen yong gyur lé
Is a syllable Mu, golden in colour, which transforms
lama chomden shakya tubpa ché
Into the Guru as the great blessed one Śākyamuni.
ser dok tsenpé ziji pal du bar
He is the colour of gold and blazes with the splendour of the signs and marks.
chak yé sa nön yönpé nyamshyak dzé
His right hand touches the earth while his left rests in equanimity.
ku la chögö nam sum dzepar lub
He is elegantly garbed in the three dharma robes.
shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung yomé shyuk
His two legs are crossed in the immovable vajra posture.
né sum yikdru sum gyi tsenpa lé
From the three syllables that mark his three centres,
yeshe chendrang damyé yermé gyur
Light invokes the wisdom deity, who dissolves inseparably into the samayasattva.
Perform the seven branches from the Aspiration to Good Actions. If you wish, you could also
offer a maṇḍala. Then, with single-pointed faith and devotion, recite:
lama tönpa chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye pal gyalwa shakya tubpa
la chaktsal lo
Supreme teacher, bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, glorious conqueror,
Śākyamuni, to you I bow. To you I pay homage.
chö do kyab su chi o
In you I take refuge.
jingyi lab tu sol
Grant your blessings, I pray.
Recite this as many times as you can. Then, as the recitation for invoking the wisdom mind,
recite:
om namo bhagawaté shakya muniyé tata gataya arahaté sanyakwambuddha yé | teyata om muni muni
mahamuni shakyamuneyé soha
Oṃ namo bhagavate śākyamuniye | tathāgatāya | arhate saṃyaksaṃbuddhaye | tadyathā | oṃ muni
muni mahāmuni śākyamuniye svāhā |
Recite this as many times as possible.
Focus your attention single-pointedly on the Teacher's heart and the circle of hair between
his eyebrows, without allowing thoughts to proliferate. Periodically, consider that unimaginable
rays of light pour from his circle of hair, mouth and heart; they purify all the realms
of this world, empty the domains of the lower realms, and bring all beings to unsurpassable
awakening. As you imagine this, train your mind in great compassion. Then, consider
how you and all other beings lack true reality. Direct your mind towards the unarisen state
that is free from elaboration and settle in the natural state of vipaśyana, the wisdom
that realizes selflessness.
At the end of the session recite:
tubwang lamé né sum dru sum lé
Rays of light stream out from the three syllables at the three centres
özer jungwa dak gi né sum tim
Of the Guru, Lord of Sages, and dissolve into my own three centres.
lü ngak yi kyi dribpa rab dak né
They purify entirely all my physical, vocal and mental obscurations,
ku sung tuk kyi ngödrub tobpar gyur
And grant the attainments of enlightened body, speech and mind.
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Recite the mantra as many times as possible.
tar ni lama ö du shyu
Finally the guru melts into light.
ö kyi gongbu ser gyi dok
And, as a luminous orb, gold in colour,
rang gi nyingkar timpa dang
Dissolves into my own heart.
tuk yi sewé ngang la shyak
And in the merging of mind and wisdom, I rest.
When rising from the session, recite verses of dedication and aspiration of appropriate length.
In between sessions, exert yourself in the six recollections1 and ten forms of dharmic
activity.2

Thus, on the third 'victorious' day of the waxing phase3 of the kārttika (tenth) month in the
Fire Monkey year, Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö wrote this in the vicinity of the great gandhola
of Magadha. I pray that it blessed with purpose. Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "bla ma thub pa chen po'i bla ma'i rnal 'byor/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 4: 9–10
↑ Recollection of the Buddha, the Dharma, the Saṅgha, generosity, discipline (or relinquishing)
and the gods (or deities).↑ The ten dharmic activities (chos spyod bcu) are listed in
Maitreyanātha's Madhyāntavibhāga (ch. 5) as: copying texts, making offerings, giving charity,
studying, reading, memorizing, explaining, reciting aloud, contemplating and meditating.↑
i.e., the thirteenth day