In Praise of the Twelve Deeds

by Ārya Nāgārjuna

In the language of India: Dvādaśakāra-nāma-stotraIn the language of Tibet: mdzad pa bcu gnyis
kyi tshul la bstod pa

Homage to the Buddha Śākyamuni!

You I shall praise, who first awakened the mind of enlightenment,Then completed the accumulations
of merit and wisdom,And now in this age, through the vast sway of your actions,Have
become the lord and protector of living beings.

Homage to you who, having taught the gods,Knew the time had come to tame the human world, andDescending
from the god realm like a great elephant,Foresaw the family of your birth and
entered the womb of Māyādevī.

Homage to you, prince of the Śākyas, born after ten monthsIn the auspicious Lumbinī grove, whereBrahmā
and Indra revered you, your supreme marksProving you were destined to be enlightened.

Homage to you, lion among men, in all your youthful vigour,Displaying your prowess in the games
at Aṅga-Magadha,Where you triumphed over the proud contestants,So that not one could stand
as your rival.

Homage to you, who, to comply with worldly convention,And avoid all misdeeds, took on a queen
and courtiersAnd by acting with such skilful means,So you ruled the kingdom.

Homage to you, who saw that saṃsāra is wholly futile,Renounced the life of a householder,And,
travelling through the sky,Ordained yourself before the Viśuddha Stūpa.

Homage to you, who, intent on persevering till enlightened,For six years practised austerities
on the banks of the Nairañjanā,And taking diligence to its ultimate perfection,Attained
the supreme samādhi.

Homage to you, who, seeking to make meaningfulAll your efforts, made throughout beginningless
time, satUnmoving in the vajra posture beneath the bodhi tree in MagadhaAnd awakened into
true buddhahood, attaining perfect enlightenment.

Homage to you, who, in your compassion,Gazed at once upon living beings, thenTurned the Wheel
of Dharma in sacred places like Vārāṇasī,And established disciples in the three vehicles.

Homage to you who destroyed evil-minded opponents,By defeating the six teachers of the tīrthikas,
Devadatta and the rest,As well as the māras in Vārāṇasī;[1]You were the mighty sage,
victorious in battle.

Homage to you, who performed great miracles in Śrāvastī,Unmatched in their splendour in all
the three realms,And through the offerings made by gods, humans and other beings,Caused the
teachings to prosper and increase.

Homage to you, who, to spur the lazy on to the Dharma,Left your body, though immortal and like
a vajra,And passed into parinirvāṇaIn the pure abode of Kuśinagara.

Homage to you, who, to show that you had not in reality perished,And so that beings of the future
could gain merit,Emanated a wealth of relics, and causedYour remains to be divided into
eight portions.

Through the merit of briefly praising in this way,The great acts of the lord who is master of
the teachings,May the actions of all living beingsCome to equal those of the Sugata himself.

This concludes the praise of the twelve deeds composed by the great master Ārya Nāgārjuna.

| Translated by Patrick Gaffney and Adam Pearcey, 2016.

Tib. ‘khor mo ‘jig. According to Sakya Paṇḍita’s Gateway to Learning (mkhas ‘jug), this is an
alternative name of Vārāṇasī.  ↩