Great Praise of the Twelve Acts of the Buddha
by Ārya Nāgārjuna

tabkhé tukjé shakyé rik su trung
With skilful means and compassion, you were born in the Śākya clan,
shyen gyi mitub dü kyi pung jompa
Unconquerable by others, you vanquished Māra's hordes,
ser gyi lhünpo tabur jipé ku
Your physical form resplendent, like a mountain of gold.
shakyé gyalpo khyö la chaktsal lo
To you, the King of the Śākyas, I pay homage!1

gang gi dangpor changchub tukkyé né
You I shall praise, who first awakened the mind of enlightenment,
sönam yeshe tsok nyi dzok dzé ching
Then completed the accumulations of merit and wisdom,
dü dir dzepa gyachen drowa yi
And now in this age, through the vast sway of your actions,
gön gyur khyö la dak gi töpar gyi
Have become the lord and protector of living beings.

lha nam dön dzé dulwé dü khyen né
Homage to you, who, having taught the gods,
lha lé bab né langchen tar shek shing
Knew the time had come to tame the human world, and
rik la zik né lhamo gyutrulmé
Descending from the god realm like a great elephant,
lhum su shyukpar dzé la chaktsal lo
Foresaw the family of your birth and entered the womb of Māyādevī.

dawa chu dzok shakyé sepo ni
Homage to you, prince of the Śākyas, born after ten months
tashi lumbi tsal du tampé tsé
In the auspicious Lumbinī grove, where
tsang dang gyajin gyi tü tsen chok ni
Brahmā and Indra revered you, your supreme marks
changchub rik su ngedzé chaktsal lo
Proving you were destined to be enlightened.

shyönnu tobden mi yi sengé dé
Homage to you, lion among men, in all your youthful vigour,
agha magadhar ni gyutsal ten
Displaying your prowess in the games at Aṅga-Magadha,
kyewo drekpachen nam tsarché né
Where you triumphed over the proud contestants,
drenda mepar dzé la chaktsal lo
So that not one could stand as your rival.

jikten chö dang tünpar jawa dang
Homage to you, who, to comply with worldly convention,
khana mato pang chir tsünmo yi
And avoid all misdeeds, took on a queen and courtiers
khor dangden dzé tab la khepa yi
And by acting with such skilful means,
gyalsi kyongwar dzé la chaktsal lo
So you ruled the kingdom.

khorwé jawar nyingpo mé zik né
Homage to you, who saw that saṃsāra is wholly futile,
khyim né jung té kha la shek né kyang
Renounced the life of a householder,
chörten namdak drung du nyi lé nyi
And, travelling through the sky,
rabtu jungwar dzé la chaktsal lo
Ordained yourself before the Viśuddha Stūpa.

tsönpé changchub drubpar gong né ni
Homage to you, who, intent on persevering till enlightened,
nairanjané dram du lo druk tu
For six years practised austerities on the banks of the Nairañjanā,
kawa ché dzé tsöndrü tarchinpé
And taking diligence to its ultimate perfection,
samten chok nyé dzé la chaktsal lo
Attained the supreme samādhi.

tokma mé né bepa dönyö chir
Homage to you, who, seeking to make meaningful
magadha yi changchub shingdrung du
All your efforts, made throughout beginningless time, sat
kyiltrung miyo ngönpar sangye né
Unmoving in the vajra posture beneath the bodhi-tree in Magadha
changchub dzokpar dzé la chaktsal lo
And awakened into true buddhahood, attaining perfect enlightenment.

tukjé dro la nyurdu zik né ni
Homage to you, who, in your compassion,
varanasi lasok né chok tu
Gazed at once upon living beings, then
chö kyi khorlo kor né dulja nam
Turned the wheel of Dharma in sacred places like Vārāṇasī,
tekpa sum la gö dzé chaktsal lo
And established disciples in the three vehicles.

shyen gyi golwa ngenpa tsarché chir
Homage to you, who destroyed evil-minded opponents,
mutek tönpa druk dang lhejin sok
By defeating the six teachers of the tīrthikas, Devadatta and the rest,
khormo jik gi yul du dü nam tul
As well as the māras in Vārāṇasī;2
tubpa yul lé gyal la chaktsal lo
You were the mighty sage, victorious in battle.

sipa sum na pemé yönten gyi
Homage to you, who performed great miracles in Śrāvastī,
nyen du yöpar chotrul chenpo ten
Unmatched in their splendour in all the three realms,
lhami drowa kün gyi rab chöpa
And through the offerings made by gods, humans and other beings,
tenpa gyepar dzé la chaktsal lo
Caused the teachings to prosper and increase.

lelo chen nam chö la kuljé chir
Homage to you, who, to spur the lazy on to the Dharma,
tsachok drong gi sashyi tsangma ru
Left your body, though immortal and like a vajra,
chimé dorjé tabü ku shek né
And passed into parinirvāṇa
nya ngen dawar dzé la chaktsal lo
In the pure abode of Kuśinagara.

yangdak nyi du jikpamé chir dang
Homage to you, who, to show that you had not in reality perished,
ma ong semchen sönam tobjé chir
And so that beings of the future could gain merit,
denyi du ni ringsel mang trul né
Emanated a wealth of relics, and caused
kudung cha gyé dzé la chaktsal lo
Your remains to be divided into eight portions.

de tar tenpé dakpo chomden gyi
Through the merit of briefly praising in this way,
dzepé tsul la do tsam töpa yi
The great acts of the lord who is master of the teachings,
gewé drowa kun gyi chöpa yang
May the actions of all living beings
deshek nyi kyi chö dang tsung par shok
Come to equal those of the Sugata himself.

deshyin shekpa khyé ku chindra dang
O Tathāgata, may I and others have a form,
khor dang ku tsé tsé dang shying kham dang
An entourage, a life-span, a pure realm
khyé kyi tsen chok zangpo chindra wa
And sublime marks of perfection
dé dra khonar dak sok gyurwar shok
Exactly like you.

khyé la tö ching solwa tabpé tü
Through the power of our praising you and this prayer,
dak sok gang du nepé sa chok su
In whatever lands we dwell, may
né dang wul pong taptsö shyiwa dang
Illness, negativity, poverty, and conflict be quelled,
chö dang tashi pelwar dzé du söl
And Dharma and auspiciousness increase and spread.3

| Rigpa Translations 2008, Revised 2016.

Version: 2.1-20210909
↑ This verse has been added to Nāgārjuna's original text, possibly by Drikung Kyobpa Jikten
Sumgön.↑ Tib. ‘khor mo ‘jig. According to Sakya Paṇḍita’s Gateway to Learning (mkhas ‘jug),
this is an alternative name of Vārāṇasī.↑ These last two verses have been added to Nāgārjuna's
original text, possibly by Drikung Kyobpa Jikten Sumgön.