Praise of the Twelve Acts of the Buddha
by Jigme Lingpa

gawa gyaden chimé drongkhyer né
In the city of the immortal gods, in the heaven of Tuṣita,
changchub sem kyi dampa tok karpo
The bodhisattva, holy Śvetaketu, saw the vessel
shakyé rik kyi tikler dzinpé nö
To contain the successor of the Śākya clan
gyutrul lhamo ridak mikchen yin
Was the lady Māyādevī, her eyes of doe-like beauty.
ötong shar gyi ri la chepa shyin
Like the splendour of a sunrise on a mountain’s eastern face,
lhum kyi gesar shyepa lumbi tsal
She gave birth, a lotus opening in blossom, in the Lumbinī grove,
tsang dang wangpö sishyü dzé jé shing
Brahmā and Indra there to serve you, to tend you with all their grace;
changchub rik su lungten la chaktsal
You who were prophesied into the lineage of enlightened ones, I bow to you in homage!

langtsö drekpé shakya shyönnü ü
Among the Śākya youths, vaunting their athletic physique,
gyutsal drukchu tsashyi roltsé tü
You excelled in your prowess in the sixty four crafts;
kün gyi khyé la tü ching drakpa yi
All conceded victory and your renown
kyegü namshé mik dang nawar dzok
Filled the eyes and ears of all.
dö sé shyakpé shyenwang magyur shyin
Never were you slave to the noose of craving and desire,
yab chik gyé lé tsünmö gyuma la
Yet to please your father, you married, but saw this illusion
gyumé tawé té né gyalpö khab
For the illusion that it was, ruling the kingdom all the while.
kyangpé dön kün drubpa la chaktsal
So you were known as Sarvārthasiddha: I bow to you in homage!

shintu yo shying jikpa gyalsi kyi
Though precarious, fraught with danger and with change,
chakkyü wang duma gyur gamé kyang
No-one was immune to the allure of the kingdom, save you.
ngepar jungwé kyen shyi khyé kyi tuk
Your mind was captivated by the four encounters that caused renunciation,
trok né rangjung gelong nyi du ten
And you ordained yourself, a self-originating bhikṣu.
tsöndrü lab kyi mi ngal nairanjanar
Your constant perseverance, never tiring, by the Nairañjanā river
katub dungwa zöpé nyingtob dang
Gave you the strength of mind to bear the agony of austerities, and
küntok dulwa dzinpé samten la
The concentration to keep on taming conceptual thought,
chok chü deshek gyé la chaktsal lo
Which delighted the sugatas of the ten directions: I bow to you in homage!

drangmé sum gyi si du namrik kün
Through three incalculable aeons in samsaric existence,
tsok nyi tagü chingpa dönyö chir
You sought the meaningful, by binding all your thoughts
With the rope of accumulating merit and wisdom.
changchub shingdrung dü nam trakjé né
Then, beneath the bodhi tree, you put the māras to flight,
ngönpar dzok sang gyawa gyal kün shi
And attained enlightenment, as all the buddhas do.
khorwa ting tamepé yangsa la
On the ship of the three turnings of the Wheel of Dharma, you save
gyukpé drowa khorlo sum gyi drü
Beings who rush into saṃsāra’s bottomless and endless abyss,
dral né tarpa dang ni namkhyen gyi
And ferry them to the perfect levels of liberation and omniscience:
gopang triwa khyé la chaktsal lo
I bow to you in homage!

tok ching chö kyang dompa minpé chang
Through the magical power of your miracles in Śravastī,
tungpé ché zir mutek tönpé ché
You rendered speechless the tīrthika teachers who,
nyen du yöpé chotrul tü chepé
With all their analysis and research, drunk on the wine of indulgence, had become oppressive
in the extreme.
kyeng dang ziji nyampé choga dzok
In the final contest they were humbled, their prestige all drained away,
dzutrul kangpa shyi la chok tob khyé
As you triumphed through the ‘four bases of miraculous powers’.
kyé ga na chi tsorwa minyong yang
Though you never experienced the feelings of birth, old age, sickness and death,
ngepar parol dro di misem nam
To bring disillusion to those who never think on the certainty of death,
kyo lé nya ngen da tön der chaktsal
You displayed your passing into parinirvāṇa: I bow to you in homage!

sönam nyamchung gyurpé drowa nam
As a device to let beings whose merit is weak or small
karpö chö rab pelwé tsong zong ni
Increase their practice of the positive and virtuous,
dzepa mepé ringsel cha gyé du
You left relics, that were inexhaustible, in eight shares,
shyak té chö kyi ying su zimpa tar
And you slept in the dharmadhātu. So, may I too
dak kyang dzok min jang sum tarchin né
Bring perfecting, maturing and creating pure realms to completion,
kham sum lé dé womin chenpo ru
Then in the great Akaniṣṭha, that transcends the three realms,
ngönpar sangye trulpé dzepa chü
Attain manifest buddhahood and through the ten acts displayed by a supreme emanation,
künkhyen khyé dang dro dön nyampar shok
Become your equal, omniscient one, in benefitting beings!

This is the word of Rigdzin Jigme Lingpa.

| Rigpa Translations