Short Praise of the Buddha's Deeds
attributed to Āryaśūra

gang tsé kang nyi tsowo khyö tam tsé
When you were born, chief among human beings,
sa chen di la gompa dün bor né
You took seven steps on this earth and said:
nga ni jikten di na chok ché sung
“In this world I am supreme.”
detsé khepa khyö la chaktsal lo
To you, O wise one, I pay homage!1

dangpo ganden lha yi yul né jön
First, you descended from the heaven of Tuṣita,
gyalpö khab tu yum gyi lhum su shyuk
And in the royal home entered your mother’s womb;
lumbini yi tsal du tubpa tam
In the grove at Lumbinī, O sage, you were born:
chomden lha yi lha la chaktsal lo
To the victorious ‘god among gods’, I pay homage!

shyalyé khang du mama gyé shyi chö
You were tended by thirty-two nurses at the palace,
shakyé drong du shyönnü roltsé dzé
You spent your youth in sports at the house of the Śākyas;
serkyé né su sa tso khab tu shyé
At Kapilavastu you took Gopā as your wife:
si sum tsungmé ku la chaktsal lo
To you who are unequalled in the three worlds, I pay homage!

drongkhyer go shyir kyowé tsul ten né
At the four city gates, you were shown the four kinds of sorrow,
chörten namdak drung du utra sil
And cut your own hair in front of the Viśuddha Stūpa;
nairanjané dram du katub dzé
On the banks of the Nairañjanā you practised as an ascetic:
drib nyi kyön dangdral la chaktsal lo
To you who are free from the faults of the two obscurations, I pay homage!

gyalpö khab tu langchen nyönpa tul
At Rājagṛha you tamed a rogue elephant,
yangpachen du pé'ü drangtsi pul
In Vaiśālī the monkeys offered you honey;
magadha ru tubpa ngön sangye
In Magadha, O sage, you realized buddhahood:
khyenpé yeshe bar la chaktsal lo
To you in whom omniscient wisdom blossomed, I pay homage!

varanasir chö kyi khorlo kor
At Vārāṇasī you turned the wheel of Dharma,
dzeté tsal du chotrul chenpo ten
And in the Jeta Grove you showed great miracles;
tsachok drong du gongpa nya ngen dé
At Kuśinagara your wisdom mind passed into parinirvāṇa:
tuk ni namkha dra la chaktsal lo
To you whose mind is like the sky, I pay homage!

ditar tenpé dakpo chomdendé
Through the merit of this brief praise of
dzepé tsul la do tsam töpa yi
The deeds of the Enlightened One, Master of the Teaching,
gewé drowa kün gyi chöpa yang
May the actions of all living beings
deshek nyi kyi dzé dang tsungpar shok
Come to equal the acts of the Sugata himself.

This was composed by the ācārya Śūra.

| Rigpa Translations.
↑ This verse seemingly derives from the Sūtra of the Meeting of Father and Son (Ārya-pitāputra-samāgamana-nāma-mahāyāna-sūtra).