The Merry Sea of Blessings
A Guru Yoga of the Lord of Sages, Peerless Teacher of All, Including the Devas
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

For this guru yoga of the three-kāya Lord of Sages, begin by taking refuge and generating bodhicitta,
as elaborately or concisely as the situation demands, and cultivating the four immeasurables.
Then continue with:
ah, dün khar chötrin gyatso trikpé ü
Ah. In the sky before me, amidst vast billowing offering clouds,
rinchen trikang sengé langchen dang
Upon a jewelled throne supported by a lion, elephant,
tachok majé tekpé tri yi khar
Excellent horse and peacock,
natsok pema dab tong dalwa la
And atop a thousand-petalled, multicoloured lotus
nyima dawa gyepé den tengdu
And sun and full moon seats,
tsawé lama tulku tubpa ché
Is my own root guru in the form of the great nirmāṇakāya Sage.
drimé ser gyi lhünpo tabur ji
He is flawless and magnificent as a mountain of burnished gold,
tsenpé palbar chögö nam sum sol
Resplendent with the signs and marks, and wears the three dharma robes.
chak yé sa nön yönpa nyamshyak dang
His right hand touches the earth; his left is in the gesture of equanimity.
shyabzung dorjé kyiltrung drangpor shyuk
And he sits upright with his legs crossed in the vajra posture.
tukkar chukyé rabtu gyepé teng
Upon a fully blossomed lotus at his heart
longku tönpa dorjé chang chenpo
Is the saṃbhogakāya teacher, the great Vajradhara,
wang ngön baidü dok chang ugyen sok
The colour of sapphire and wearing a crown
rinchen gyen dang lhadzé dar gyi lub
As well as other jewel ornaments and silken garments.
tabshé zungjuk dordril tukkar nol
As the union of means and wisdom, he holds a vajra and bell across his heart.
zakmé dewa chenpö yong kheng shing
He is entirely filled with immaculate great bliss,
dé yi tuk ü ö kyi gurkhyim long
And in the centre of his heart, within a pavilion of light,
chöku kunzang ting sal namkhé dang
Is the dharmakāya Samantabhadra, vividly blue as an azure sky,
cherbu gyenmé kunzang karmor tril
Naked and unadorned, and embracing the white Samantabhadrī.
tubwang ku yi özer pungpo lé
A mass of light rays emanates from the body of the Lord of Sages,
chok chü sangye changsem nyi dul tar
Revealing the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions who gather
trikpar salwé né sum dru sum sal
Like specks of dust in a sunbeam, all with three syllables at their three centres,
ö trö yeshe sempa chendrang gyur
From which light radiates out to invite the wisdom-beings.
Recite the verse:
malü semchen kün gyi gön gyur ching
You are the protectors of all beings, every single one.
dü dé pung ché mi zé jomdzé lha
You are the deities who remorselessly destroy the māras and their forces.
ngö nam malü jishyin khyen gyurpé
You who know all things just as they are, in their true nature,
chomden khor ché né dir shek su sol
Enlightened ones, with your retinues, come now to this place!
benza samaya dza | dza hung bam ho
Vajra samājaḥ! Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ!
With this, the deities merge inseparably.
Then practise the seven branches from the Prayer of Good Actions, and the daily confession from
the Vajrapañjara three times. Offer the maṇḍala, elaborately or concisely, many times.
And recite the twenty-eight commitments that originate in the tantras of the Ancient Translations,
or “Oṃ. Sugata, whatever you are like… etc.”
lama tönpa chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye pal gyalwa shakya tubpa
la chaktsal
Supreme teacher, bhagavān, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect buddha, glorious conqueror,
Śākyamuni, to you I bow!
chö do kyab su chi o | jingyi lab tu sol
To you I pay homage! In you I take refuge!
Accumulate as many recitations of this as you can with single-pointed faith and devotion.
tönpa nyammé dren chok shakyé tok
Peerless teacher, supreme guide, foremost of the Śākyas,
ngepa ngaden khyabdak dorjé chang
Omnipresent Vajradhara, complete with fivefold certainty,
namkha dang nyam chöku kuntuzang
And dharmakāya Samantabhadra, who is equal to space—
ku sum yermé tub chok dön kün drub
These three kāyas are indivisible in the supreme sage Siddhārtha.
nying né tsechik güpé soldeb na
If I pray to you now with heartfelt and single-pointed devotion,
jinlab ngödrub tsol chik shakyé tok
Foremost of the Śākyas, grant me your blessings and attainments.
detong yeshe kyé chik dorjé chang
Vajradhara, arouse the wisdom of bliss and emptiness within me.
yedrol shyir né khyabdak kuntuzang
All-pervading lord Samantabhadra, let me remain in the ground of original freedom.
zakmé tsultrim pungpo yongsu dzok
Cause me to perfect the aggregate of immaculate discipline,
salam yönten malü tarchin té
To master every quality of the paths and stages without exception,
sishyir mi né changchub dampa nyé
To attain the sacred awakening that is unconfined to existence or quiescence,
kham sum khorwa dong né truk nü shok
And to gain the capacity to empty the three realms of saṃsāra from their very depths.
Pray in this way, and recite the longer and shorter name mantras of the great Sage, general
Buddha mantras, the Dhāraṇī of the Jewelled Ūrṇā, and the Ye Dharma. Then:
om ah guru benza dhara hung
oṃ āḥ guru vajradhara hūṃ
And:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
Recite these as many times as possible.
kunzang tukkar tiklé ser
At Samantabhadra’s heart is a golden sphere of light,
shyingkham natsok salwa dang
Which illuminates the various realms.
ö trö drowé dön nyi jé
Light shines out to accomplish beings’ twofold benefit,
tsur dü tiklé la tim shying
Then returns and dissolves back into the sphere.
tra shying takpar kawa yi
From the subtle, barely discernible
tiklé tongpa chenpo lé
Sphere of great emptiness,
tiklé nga dang gyatrak sok
Fivefold spheres and other spheres by the hundred,
ngak kyi tsenpé namkha gang
All marked with mantras, emerge to fill the whole of space.
chönyi rangdra dirwa dang
They resonate with the spontaneous sound of dharmatā,
drak tong dorjé ngak su dzok
Perfect as the mantra of vajra sound and emptiness,
lar dü tsawé tikler tim
And return to dissolve into the original sphere,
deyang chö kyi ying su yal
Then fade into the dharmadhātu.
lama ku sum gongpé ngang
Sustain that experience of the three-kāya guru’s wisdom mind,
kyang la dü sum tokdral shyak
And settle without thoughts related to past, present or future.
lar yang ku sum lhatsok lé
Then, once again, from the hosts of the three-kāya deities,
ku ö ngak treng chaktsen dang
Bodily light, mantra garlands, hand implements,
dütsi gyün ché jungwa dang
And streams of nectar all issue forth,
rang gi neshyir timpa lé
And dissolve into my own four centres,
drib dak wang dang ngödrub tob
Through which I purify obscurations, gain empowerment and siddhis,
lamé ku sum jinlab shyuk
And am infused with the blessings of the three-kāya guru.
tar ni ö shyu rang la tim
Finally all melt into light and dissolve into me,
rang lü lamé ku ru sal
And my own body appears clearly as the guru’s form.
After this, recite the Prayer of Good Actions and the following aspiration to be cared for by
the Sage:
dak ni kyé shying kyewa tamché du
Throughout this life and all my lives to come,
daljor ten tob yangdak shé dang jal
May I find a free, well-favoured form and meet a genuine teacher.
tekchen zab dang gyaché chö la chö
May I savour the profound and vast Dharma of the Great Vehicle,
tsulshyin nyam lang changchub tobpar shok
Practise it in the proper way and attain awakening.
tserab küntu tubpé chö dzö dzin
In all my lives, may I always uphold the Sage’s treasury of Dharma.
khyen tsé nüpé yönten pakmé den
May I have immeasurable qualities of knowledge, love and power.
tö sam gom la taktu tsönpa yi
Through constant application in study, reflection and meditation,
gyalwé ten la jawa jepar shok
May I act on behalf of the Victorious One’s teachings.
ten la khuwé mutek lalö tsok
May barbarians and extremists who harbour malice toward the Dharma
dak gi tob kyi tsené shyompa dang
Be entirely vanquished through my power, and may I be blessed
samjor ngenpé nöpé mi dziwar
So that, unaffected by the harms of wrongful thought or action,
chok lé nampar gyalwar jingyi lob
I come to gain victory over all.
tsé tar chin ching samdön yishyin drub
May I live a complete life and accomplish all my aims,
rabjam sungrab kün gyi denyi la
Have perfect command of all branches of the teachings,
tokmé lodrö pobpé terchen jé
And with unfettered intellect, unlock the great treasury of eloquence,
tsö ché tsom la chaktok mepar shok
So that I am without impediment in debate, exposition and composition.
dak la drelwé semchen jinyé dang
May all sentient beings who have a connection with me
namkhé khyabpé drowa tadak gi
And all who are to be found throughout the whole of space
dukngal kün sal deden shying du drong
Be freed from all their suffering and led to happy realms.
chinché lé ngen kyego chöpar shok
From this moment on, may the doors to evil births be forever closed.
gönpo jampé yang kyi tukkyé tar
As in the noble aspiration of the protector Mañjughoṣa,
semchen döndu khorwar nepa dang
May I remain in saṃsāra to act always for beings’ benefit,
changchub sem kyi trinlé chenpo yi
And may the magnificent actions of the bodhisattvas
chok dü muta mepar khyabpar shok
Extend throughout the whole infinity of space and time!
Make prayers of aspiration such as this.

Following a deceptive visionary experience that occurred when making offerings and praying at
the Mahābodhi temple in Bodhgayā on the fifth day of the twelfth month of the Fire Bird
year, Chökyi Lodrö wrote this at the great site known as Rajgir in the vicinity of Vulture
Peak Mountain on the seventh day of the same month. Siddhirastu!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "lha dang bcas pa'i ston pa mnyam med thub pa'i dbang
po la bstod ba lha'i sil snyan/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols.
Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 2: 323–327