The Treasury of Blessings: A Practice of Buddha Śākyamuni
by Mipham Rinpoche

Namo guru śākyamunaye!
In the Samādhirāja Sūtra it is said: ‘Those who, while walking, sitting, standing, or sleeping,
recollect the moon-like Buddha, will always be in Buddha’s presence and will attain the
vast nirvāṇa.’ And: ‘His pure body is the colour of gold, beautiful is the Protector of
the World. Whoever visualizes him like this practises the meditation of the bodhisattvas.’
In keeping with this, we should practise remembering our incomparable teacher, the Lord of
Sages, in the following way:
sangye chö dang tsok kyi chok nam la
In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme Assembly
changchub bardu dak ni kyab su chi
I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
dak gi jin sok gyipé sönam kyi
Through the merit of practising generosity and so on,
dro la pen chir sangye drubpar shok
May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
Recite this verse three times
Then cultivate the four immeasurables by saying:
semchen tamché dewa dang dewé gyu dang denpar gyur chik
May all sentient beings enjoy happiness and the causes of happiness!
dukngal dang dukngal gyi gyu dang dralwar gyur chik
May they be free from suffering and the causes of suffering!
dukngal mepé dewa dang mindralwar gyur chik
May they never be separated from the sacred happiness devoid of suffering!
nyering chakdang nyi dang dralwé tang nyom tsemepa la nepar gyur chik
And may they dwell in boundless equanimity that is free from attachment and aversion!
Bringing to mind how all phenomena appear and yet lack inherent existence, recite the following:
ah, kyemé tongpanyi dang tenjung gi
Āḥ! As the union of unborn emptiness and the ceaseless
nangwa gakmé zungjuk gyumé tsul
Appearances of interdependence, magically there appears
rang dün namkhar chötrin gyatsö ü
Before me in the sky, amidst vast clouds of offerings,
rinchen sengtri pé nyi dawé teng
On a jewelled lion throne, and lotus, sun and moon disc seats,
tönpa tsungmé shakya sengé ni
The incomparable teacher, Lion of the Śākyas.

ser gyi dokchen tsen dang pejé den
His body the colour of gold, adorned with major and minor marks.
chögö sum sol dorjé kyiltrung shyuk
Clad in the three Dharma robes, he sits in vajra posture.
chak yé sa nön chakgya lek kyang shing
His right hand gracefully poised in the earth-touching mudrā,
chak yön nyamshyak dütsi lhungzé nam
And his left hand is in the gesture of meditation, holding an alms-bowl full of  nectar.

ser gyi ri tar ziji pal barwa
Like a mountain of gold, magnificent, he shines in splendour,
yeshe özer drawé khaying khyab
Spreading beams of wisdom light across the whole expanse of space.
nyewé sé gyé neten chudruk sok
The Eight Close Sons, Sixteen Elders and the like—
pak tsok gyatsö khor gyi yong kor shying
A vast, ocean-like retinue of noble beings encircles him all around.
drenpa tsam gyi sishyi ta nyi lé
Simply think of him and he grants the glory of the highest bliss:
namdrol dewa chok gi pal tsolwa
Liberation from saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, the two extremes.
kyab kündüpé daknyi chenpor sal
He is the Great Being, perfect embodiment of every source of refuge.
Visualize the form of the Buddha in this way, and imagine that he is actually there, in front
of you. The instant that you generate this thought—as the buddhas' wisdom body is not constrained
by limits like time or location—he will certainly be there. One of the sūtras says:
Should anyone think of the Buddha, he is there, right in front of them, constantly granting
his blessings and freedom from all harm. The merit gained through visualizing the Buddha
is inexhaustible; it is a source of virtue that will never go to waste. As it says in
the Avataṃsaka Sūtra: By seeing, hearing or offering to the buddhas, a boundless store of
merit is amassed. Till we are rid of all the destructive emotions and the suffering of saṃsāra,
this compounded merit will never go to waste. Also, whatever prayers of aspiration
we make before the Buddha will be fulfilled.
As it says in the Teaching on the Qualities of Mañjuśrī’s Pure Land: Everything is circumstantial
and depends entirely on our aspiration. Whatever prayers of aspiration we make the results
we will gain accordingly. Generate firm conviction in these statements, and recite
the following:
nyingjé chenpö tsöden nyikmé shying
With your great compassion, you embraced this turbulent and degenerate world,
zung né mönlam chenpo ngabgya tab
And made five hundred mighty aspirations.
pekar tar ngak tsen tö chir mindok
You are as exalted as the white lotus; whoever hears your name shall never return to saṃsāra—
tönpa tukjé chen la chaktsal lo
Most compassionate teacher, to you I pay homage!

dakshyen go sum gé tsok longchö ché
All my own and others’ virtues of body, speech and mind, together with all our possessions,
kunzang chöpé trin du mik né bul
Visualized like Samantabhadra’s offering clouds, I offer to you.
tokmé né sak diktung malüpa
All the harmful actions and transgressions I have committed throughout beginningless time,
nying né gyöpa drakpö sosor shak
Each and every one I now confess, with intense and heartfelt regret.

pak dang sosö kyewö gewa ni
In all virtuous actions, of the noble ones and ordinary beings,
dü sum sak la jesu yi rang ngo
Accumulated throughout the past, present and future, I rejoice.
zab ching gyaché chö kyi khorlö tsul
Turn the Wheel of the profound and vast Dharma teachings,
chok chur gyün michepar kor du sol
Ceaselessly and in every direction, I pray!

khyö ni namkha tabü yeshe ku
Your wisdom body is like space
dü sum pogyur mepar shyuk mö kyi
And remains changeless throughout past, present and future.
duljé nang ngor kyé jik tsul tön kyang
Yet in the perception of those to be guided, you go through the display of birth and death;
trulpé zukku taktu nangwar dzö
Even so, let your form body continue always to appear.

dak gi dü sum sakpé gé tsok kyi
Through all the virtues I have accumulated in the past, am accumulating now and will accumulate
in the future,
khakhyab drowa kün la pen ledu
For the sake of benefitting all beings, who are as infinite as space,
chö kyi gyalpo taktu nyé jé ching
May you, the sovereign of Dharma, be forever pleased,
chöjé gyalwé gopang tobpar shok
And may all attain the state of the victorious one, the Lord of Dharma.

dakchak nyikmé drowa gönmé nam
Living beings like us, adrift in this degenerate age, have no guidance and protection.
tukjé lhakpar zungwé kadrin lé
Because of your kindness, caring for us with surpassing compassion,
shying dang dü dir rinchen nam sum gyi
Every manifestation, in this world now, of the Three Jewels
nangwa jinyé khyé kyi trinlé nyi
Is your enlightened activity.

dechir kyab chok tsungmé chikpu ru
You are then our only refuge, incomparable, supreme;
yiché depé nying né soldeb na
So from our hearts we pray, with total confidence and faith:
ngön gyi damcha chenpo manyelwar
Do not neglect the great promises you made in times gone by.
changchub bardu tukjé jedzin dzö
But hold us, until we attain enlightenment, with your compassion.
With the strongest possible confidence and faith, consider that the Buddha is actually there,
in front of you. Concentrate one-pointedly on his form. And recite the following as many
times as you can:
lama tönpa chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye pal gyalwa shakya tubpa
la chak tsal lo chö do kyab su chi o
Supreme teacher, bhagavan, tathāgata, arhat, complete and perfect Buddha, glorious conqueror,
Śākyamuni Buddha, to you I pay homage! To you I make offerings! In you I take refuge!
Then, as a means of invoking his wisdom mind, recite as many times as you can the following
dhāraṇī, which is taught in the abridged Prajñāpāramitā:
teyata om muné muné maha munayé soha
tadyathā oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā
Then recite, as many times as possible, the same mantra from oṃ onwards:
om muné muné maha munayé soha
oṃ mune mune mahāmunaye svāhā
During all this, bring to mind the Buddha’s qualities and, with a mind full of devotion, concentrate
one-pointedly on the clear visualization of his form. Then, through the power of
uttering the names of the Buddha and reciting his dhāraṇī, imagine that:
tönpé ku lé yeshe kyi özer natsokpé nangwa chenpö dak dang semchen tamché kyi dribpa tamché
sal shying
From the Buddha’s body there emanates a great radiance, of multi-coloured rays of wisdom light,
dispelling all our own and others’ obscurations,
tekpa chenpö lam gyi yönten tsulshyin du kyé té chirmidokpé sa nönpar gyur
And causing all the genuine qualities of the Mahāyāna path to arise within us, so that we attain
the level of perfection from which we will never return again to saṃsāra.
Diligently apply yourself to this practice, as much as you can. In between sessions, practise
maṇḍala offering, and recite, to the best of your ability, whichever sūtras you prefer,
such as the Praises of the Buddha, White Lotus of Compassion, Lalitavistara, Jātaka Tales,
or The One Hundred and Eight Names of the Tathāgatas. Dedicate your sources of virtue towards
unsurpassable awakening and recite prayers of aspiration.

deshek sé ché kün gyi tukkyé dang
Like all the buddhas and their heirs — in enlightened intention,
dzepa mönlam khyen tsé nüpé tsul
And in activity, aspiration, wisdom, love and capacity,
lamé yeshe gyutrul chindrawa
In these and all the ways unsurpassable wisdom manifests —
dendra khonar dak sok gyurwar shok
May I and every other being too come to be exactly as they are!1

In general, whatever you are doing, whether it is moving, walking, sleeping or sitting, you
should constantly remember the Buddha. Even at night, when you go to sleep, consider that
the radiance of the Buddha’s form illuminates the whole of space in every direction, lighting
it up as brightly as during the day. At all times, emulate the buddha’s actions from the
moment he first generated the mind of awakening, and follow the example of the buddhas
and great bodhisattvas of the past, present and future. Maintaining your commitment to precious
bodhicitta, without ever allowing it to waver, exert yourself as much as possible in
the bodhisattvas’ conduct in general, and in the practices of śamatha and vipaśyanā in particular,
so as to make meaningful the freedoms and advantages of this human existence. It
is said in several sūtras that merely hearing the name of our teacher, the Buddha, ensures
that one will gradually progress along the path to great enlightenment, without ever falling
back. It is also said that the dhāraṇī revealed above is the source of all the buddhas.
It was through the force of discovering this dhāraṇī that the King of Śākyas himself attained
enlightenment, and that Avalokiteśvara became the supreme of all the bodhisattvas.
Through simply hearing this dhāraṇī, a vast accumulation of merit will easily be gained and
all karmic obscurations will be purified, and when it is recited, obstacles will not occur.
This has been taught in the Abridged Prajñāpāramitā. Other teachings say that by reciting
this dhāraṇī only once, all the harmful actions you have committed throughout eight hundred
billion kalpas will be purified. They say that it possesses boundless qualities such
as these and is the sacred heart-essence of Buddha Śākyamuni. The ways to generate faith
and exert oneself in the practices of śamatha and vipaśyanā are explained elsewhere.

The intention to compose this text first arose due to the persistent encouragement of Ön Orgyen
Tenzin Norbu, who is a holder of the treasury of threefold training, and who accompanied
his request with the offering of auspicious substances. More recently, the same Ön Rinpoche
sent Tulku Jikmé Pema Dechen, with gifts of gold and other auspicious substances, saying,
“Please finish it quickly.” At the urging of these two great masters, I, Mipham Jamyang
Gyatso, a follower of Śākyamuni with unshakeable faith in the supreme teacher and is a
Dharma teacher in name only during this final age, composed this at Phuntsok Norbüi Ling at
the foot of Mount Dza Dorje Penchuk. It was completed on the eighth day of the Month of
Miracles in the Iron Rat year.2
May this benefit the teachings and beings continuously, without interruption, on a marvellous
scale, and may all who see, hear, think of, or come into contact with it in any way, truly
receive the incomparable blessings of our teacher, the Lord of Sages.

| Translated by Rigpa Translations, with reference to existing versions by Tulku Thondup Rinpoche
and the Padmakara Translation Group.
↑ These four lines are not part of the original text but are added here in most recent editions↑
i.e., 1900. This would mean he only completed the text in the year of Orgyen Tenzin Norbu's
death.